[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome,
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we are going to explore
the religious significance
of entheogenic
plants and chemicals.
With me is Professor Huston
Smith, one of the world's
great authorities on religion.
He is the author of
"The World's Religions,"
as well as "The
Forgotten Truth,"
"Beyond the Postmodern
Mind," and "Cleansing
the Doors of Perception."
He is an Emeritus Professor
in Philosophy and Religion
from MIT, Syracuse,
and Berkeley.
Welcome, Huston.
>> It's very good
to be here, Jeffrey.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
Let's define this very
interesting term, entheogenic.
>> The etymology
is god-containing--
"theos" is god-- but it
would be a little more
accurate to say god-disclosing.
And the popular word in the
1960s was the psychedelics,
but that decade caused
those substances
to careen off in
a very crazy way.
And so the people who are
seriously interested are
interested in chemical changes
in the brain for serious
reasons, specifically
for mystical disclosures,
intentionally want to dissociate
these substances from the crazy
psychedelic '60s, and
so they have adopted--
and the tendency is
going in their direction
now to refer to
them as entheogens.
>> Entheogens.
>> It's not an easy
word, I have to--
>> God-disclosing.
>> Yes, that's the--
>> Uh huh.
>> --meaning.
>> The original meaning
of psychedelic I think was
something like mind manifesting.
>> Yes, and that's all right.
Innocuous.
If it had not picked up
that crazy cultural baggage
that that decade loaded it with.
>> And some other terms that
have been used over the years
would include hallucinogenic.
>> That I stubbornly refuse to
use because that has the word--
the connotation of deception.
I mean, a hallucination is
something that we think we see,
but it's not there.
And so that has a pejorative
built into the word,
And so I think that definitely
should be red penciled.
>> Yeah.
Well-- and even
worse, I think, I've
heard the term
psychomimetic, suggesting
that these substances mimic
the effects of psychosis.
>> Yes, that also--
our culture with the
hysteria over the drug war
is so mixed up on this issue,
which was one of the reasons
that I decided to
risk taking it on,
to try to introduce some
sober sanity into our thinking
in this area.
>> Well one of the
points that you make,
if I understand your
thinking correctly--
and you've been writing and
thinking about these substances
for about 40 years--
is that the experience
that one has
can vary widely depending
upon what the person brings
to the experience.
>> Absolutely.
If there's one thing
that is undisputed
in this very
controversial area, it
is that there is no such thing
as the or a drug experience.
Because the chemical
effects on the brain
are always filtered through--
the technical words
are set and setting.
Set is the psychological
makeup of the ingester,
and setting is the social
situation in which it is taken.
And those always enter in--
which makes the whole
phenomena complex,
but we always have to
introduce those two things
when talking about experience.
>> Now you yourself were exposed
to these entheogens at a time
when you had already made a
pretty solid life commitment
to the study of
religion and philosophy.
You were a professor at MIT.
>> Yes.
That's a fair statement.
I had given 20 years to
exploring world religion--
at that time, most
concertedly to Hinduism,
a decade in the Vedanta
under the tutelage
of a very able teacher, and then
with Daiset Suzuki in Buddhism,
10 years in Buddhism.
And through them,
I became convinced
of the truth of the
mystical vision of reality.
But even my 20
years of meditation
had not taken me very
far towards actually
experiencing that reality.
And so when Aldous
Huxley's book,
"The Doors of
Perception," appeared,
I thought, well,
there may be hope even
for a flat-footed mystical
Huston in this lifetime.
I might need a little
boost, and this might do it.
>> Mm-hmm.
And you had the
opportunity to participate
in research sponsored
by Harvard University
and funded, I believe,
by the US government
to explore the uses
of these substances
in a therapeutic context.
>> I'm not sure about the
resources of the government.
Harvard had sufficient
resources for the project,
but it is true, I
was very fortunate.
I had in my encounter
with these substances
when they were not only legal,
but they were respectable.
My ingestions were a part
of the Harvard experiment.
And frankly, I thought that
this part, important, though,
those years were and
those experiences were,
I thought this was sort
of 30 years in the past.
But there is a new breed
of people who have--
young people who have
won my respect, who
are trying to carve out
in this crazy situation
on this subject, trying
to carve out a space
where serious students can
responsibly and legally have
this experience, which
just let me just insert--
Aldous Huxley, one of the great
intellects of our century,
said is beyond any question
the most significant experience
a human being can have short
of the beatific vision.
Now to come back, these
young people are trying--
and they're working very
closely with drug officials
in Washington, they will do
nothing illegal, and they--
it is they who came to me and
said, we've been tracking you.
These people are whizzes
on internet and websites,
and we discovered
that over the years,
you have written eight essays
on this subject, various aspects
of it.
We've scanned
them, and they even
handed me a bound
book already and said,
we think these
essays would help us
in our cause to try to
introduce some sanity here.
May we bring them out in a book?
It had never occurred to me when
I first heard the possibility,
I think I winced a
little because I can just
see what little
reputation I had built up
and my 40-year career
just being smashed
by virtue of entering into
such a controversial subject.
But in the end, I agreed,
because I had the experience--
and I'm very
grateful that I and--
this is in keeping with
William James, who,
under nitrous oxide, has had
experiences and needs said,
he could not close
his books on reality
without taking
them into account.
So if it could help
the next generation
to have responsible
experiences of this kind,
I wanted to do what I could.
>> Huston, we'll
take a short break.
We'll be back.
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
My guest is s Huston Smith, one
of the world's great scholars
of religion, and
we are discussing
the religious significance
of entheogenic plants
and chemicals, chemicals
that help to bring
about the experience of God.
And let's talk about
that experience, Huston.
You-- actually, one of
the essays that you wrote
describes your early
experiences, and as I recall,
you describe it as an empirical
approach to metaphysics,
the realities that are described
in the mystical literature
of the world and the mystical
philosophy of the world
became tangible to you.
I think they became
what William James would
call a direct experience.
>> Yeah.
That is true.
I was a subject in
the Harvard project,
and one of the conditions
of being a subject
would be that the day
after, one would write up
an account of one's experiences.
And I had already
become convinced
of the mystical
view of the world,
but I hadn't gotten very
far in experiencing it.
And so that is what happened.
It is a view of mounting
through higher and higher realms
of reality towards the
clear light of the void.
And I can read about
it, and I believed it,
but I had never, as you
say, experienced it,
and you're quite right
in your reference.
There was one point in
which I even found myself
laughing at the scholars who had
credited the mystics as beings
to pin the speculative
thinkers building
this incredible
view of the world,
and I laughed because I thought,
if they had some of this stuff,
why, they would have only had
to have been hack reporters just
setting down what they saw
with their eye of the heart
or the eye of the soul.
>> Now my question
would be this.
Since you had studied
these mystical teachings
and had become a professional
philosopher specializing
in these teachings,
is it possible
that what you were, in
effect, experiencing directly
was the edifice of your own
thoughts on the subject?
>> Oh, I-- earlier we were
referred to set and setting,
set being the makeup of the
ingester, and I have no doubt--
in fact, I would suspect that
that's true with everyone.
And so one has this
experience through the lens
of one's own personality,
including one's belief.
So the match was so
perfect between what
I believed with my mind and what
I was now seeing, that I'm sure
that there was that--
what should I say, screen?
But that, of course,
in my mind does not
challenge at all the
validity because I
believe that's the
way things are anyway
whether we see them or not.
>> So if I understand
you correctly,
what you're saying is that
yes, there was that level
of your mental structure,
but beyond that,
there's an ontological reality,
something real that your mind
was touching.
>> Oh, I believe that's true.
Philosophically one would call
me a metaphysical realist.
I think that what
we're thinking about
is out there whether
we're here or not,
and we are trying
to understand it.
So I'm very much opposed
to the constructivist view
that we make our own reality.
We influence how we
experience the world,
but that stone is there
for us to stumble over
whether we see it or not.
>> And you mention that a
big part of your preparation
as a scholar in the field
of religion was the study
of Vedanta.
>> That's true.
>> And in Vedanta--
>> That was the first that laid
down the foundation for about
10 years studying in that.
>> When one studies the Vedas,
the ancient religious writings
of India, one cannot avoid
the repeated ecstatic mention
of a substance called Soma.
>> These scholars, indologists
all agree that of the 10 books
so that the Rigveda, the
foundations of Hinduism,
the 10th book is devoted
entirely to hymns to this god
Soma, and indologists agree
that there is a fervor,
there is a passion, there is
a kind of ecstasy that runs
through that book relating
to that god that exceeds that
of the other nine volumes.
>> And it's understood
that Soma, although a God--
and I presume that the sanskrit
word is the same word that we
use when we talk about soma--
the body, it's a substance.
It was something they ingested.
I think the hymns are
very clear about how
they prepared it and--
>> That's right.
It made its abode
in the soma plant
in exactly the way in which
American Indians and South
America will refer to the
mushrooms as God's flesh.
So yes, that was its
dwelling on Earth.
>> And we're not talking now
about a shamanistic culture,
we're talking about one of
the world's great religions.
>> Absolutely.
That's a fair statement.
>> But of course, I don't
mean to denigrate shamanism,
because one would find around
the world, if I'm correct,
Huston, in Africa and in South
America and in the islands
and in Siberia that the
original impulse for spiritual
experience as manifested
through shamanism was always
intertwined with various vines
and plants and what we could
call entheogens.
>> And in Mesoamerica
today, very definitely.
>> We have the Native
American Church.
>> That's right.
Stemming out of that foundation.
>> In which the substance--
the peyote cactus, which--
>> Right.
>> --is a entheogenic substance
is considered a sacrament.
>> Absolutely.
Well, I don't need
to go into it,
but I spent two years working
with a Native American church
when the Supreme Court in 1990--
if you'll excuse me, I think is
the most perfidious ruling they
ever handed down, stripped
the Native American Church
of its constitutional
religious right
because its sacrament is peyote.
Now peyote you cannot get
addicted to, and not a single
misdemeanor has ever been
traced to that substance,
but because that's
their sacrament.
Now whereas alcohol, when
we compare the difference,
70% of the cases that turn up in
emergency room in hospitals are
alcohol-related, but when--
because that's our sacrament,
the dominant religion
of the world, that's all
right, but this is theirs,
and so that's not--
the injustice of that
situation, but we
weren't going to
talk about politics.
>> The point that you seem
to be stressing, though,
from your researches is that
the Native Americans who ingest
peyote in a religious context
are engaging in authentic
spiritual practice
and experience.
>> Absolutely.
In the course of those
four years, why--
two years, by the way, two
of the most rewarding years
of my work, I had four all-night
vigils in the teepee with them.
And nowhere in
any tradition have
I felt more spiritual
sincerity and intensity
than in those
teepees that night.
There is a chapter in
my book devoted entirely
to that subject.
>> Mm-hmm.
So at the same time,
you're quite critical.
You have been critical
of the popular culture,
the psychedelic--
sort of the abuse of these
substances into something
more casual.
>> Absolutely.
It is a very murky
social situation.
And the attempt to isolate
entheogenic substances, which
I'm tempted to say
have no danger--
now that-- point,
point, point, point,
not quite right, but
almost so to isolate
that form popular recreational
use is a very difficult thing.
>> Huston, thank you so much,
it's been a pleasure sharing
this time with you.
>> I've enjoyed it also.
Thank you.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]